Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs and
the MGN by Doctor Matt Grossman. He's director of
the Institute for Public Policy and Social Research and
Professor of Political Science at Michigan State University. And
today we're going to talk about his book Polarized
by Degrees, How the Diploma divide and the Culture
War Transformed American Politics. So, Doctor Grossman, welcome to
the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thanks for having us.
So, let me ask you first before we get
into more detail here. Broadly speaking, how would you
characterize the divide you explore in your book? What
is it really about?
Well, the diploma divide usually refers to the electoral
divide between uh people without college degrees and with
college degrees, uh voting for parties of the left
and the right. Uh, AND indeed, uh across uh
the world, uh, there has been an Increase in
the divide between college educated and non-college educated voters,
uh, but in the US because we have a
two-party system, it's taken an extremely polarized uh form,
uh, and it has transformed, uh, each major political
party. Uh, THE divide is very associated with the
rise of social and cultural issues in our politics,
uh, relative to economic issues. Uh, SO where the
discussion is more about, uh, society and culture, we
see bigger education divides and lower income divides. Uh,
AND so, uh, the divide is not just about
social groups or status, it's also about the overall
direction of society, uh, and, uh, the rise in,
uh, social, uh, progressivism, uh, and those folks for
and against it.
Mhm. So in the book, you go through two
major social trends that motivate your analysis, mainly the
steady growth of educational experience in the US and
also the liberalization of, of American society since the
1980s. Could you explain each of those trends?
Sure, so I think people when they hear polarization
or big divide, they think things are probably steady,
that is, they're calcified, but actually there's been quite
a bit of change, uh, that is, uh, we
are much more educated than we were in the
past, uh, college graduation, uh, graduate school, every form
of educational credentialism is growing, and Uh, social and
cultural issue opinions in the American public and across
our, uh, social sectors are moving leftward. That is,
uh, we've moved to more, uh, liberal positions on
issues like race and gender and gay rights. That
doesn't mean it's steady and never goes back, but
the overall progression over decades uh has uh been
uh leftward. So, uh, how that manifests in the
two political parties is that the Republican Party really,
its coalition hasn't changed that much. It's always been
predominantly, uh, white non-college voters. Uh, BUT, uh, the
Democratic Party has changed dramatically, where white non-college voters
have been replaced as the plurality constituency by white
college voters. And the party is getting more diverse,
uh, so a really huge change in the coalition
of the parties, uh, and pretty recent, where, uh,
you know, half of Bill Clinton's votes came from
white voters without college degrees in the 1990s, and
less than a quarter of Joe Biden's votes did
in the most recent election. So, another way of
saying that is all of the change that's occurring
in American society, the increased education and the diversification
has been occurring kind of doubling within the Democratic
Party and trying to not really occur within the
Republican Party.
And how are these two major trends related to
one another? Did the liberalization of American society follow
the growth of educational experience the other way around?
I mean, what is the relationship here?
Uh, THEY are self reinforcing trends, but they also
both have, uh, factors that are causing them independently
of the other. So it's really the culmination of
both trends, uh, that is, uh, producing this huge
change in American society. But I think one clue
that it isn't just kind of happenstance is that
it's happening all over the world, uh, that is.
Uh, ACROSS the rich world, we're seeing decreasing divides
between the left and right based on income and
more, uh, increasing divides based on education, and that's
occurring where these cultural issues are becoming more dominant
and where society is moving leftward at a faster
pace. So all of that suggests that there are
sort of inherent trends here having to do with
modernization of society, secularization, uh, diversification. Globalization that are
affecting everyone, they just and and causing both of
those trends, but uh they are uh occurring, they're
taking this very different form in the US because
we have no like populist, anti-immigration party to take
the lower educated uh constituents in on the right,
and we have no Green Party, or other, uh,
kind of higher education party to take uh those
folks on the left. So they both transformed the
major two parties.
Mhm. And more broadly, apart from these two major
trends, what are the factors that play the biggest
role in social change, in the changing of social
values?
Well, it's a complicated issue, obviously, um, but, um,
the, there is an old theory in political science
that uh basically once called post-materialism that says once
you uh got uh basic access uh to uh
uh resources and the ability to live your lives,
then people started to become concerned about other issues
like equality. uh, LIKE, uh, environmental, uh, is, uh,
and, uh, another more another related trend that's usually
uh talked about is that, you know, there really
was a worldwide kind of awakening of social and
cultural values in the 1960s in the United States,
um, but that uh uh moved across uh the
the rich world. We Aren't sort of seeking to
have like one big explanation of that. Just observing
that, you know, for a prediction made 40 years
ago, it's pretty good, or 50 years ago, it's
a pretty good indicator of how things uh have
uh traveled across uh the the rich world. That's
not to say that, you know, political actors didn't
have a role in this. You can see that
because some of these trends were delayed, right? So
there might have been an increase and there was
a, you know, a women's movement and a gay
rights movement for a long time, but it still
took political actors to make those issues more central
to our politics and politics in other parts of
the world. So, um, they weren't necessarily inevitable that
they would happen at this particular time, but we
think there were a lot of forces pushing in
the same direction.
Mhm. So in terms of demographics, you mentioned that
briefly earlier, but what are the demographics that tend
to represent the diploma divide? Is it the degree
holding white Democrats and degree lacking white Republicans? Is
it that?
Uh, IT'S certainly most pronounced among uh white Americans,
but it's starting to occur among Hispanic Americans and
Asian Americans, to a lesser degree among black Americans
because they're just sticking with the Democratic Party at
such, uh, enormously enormous rates. Uh, BUT, uh, it
is most, most concentrated and happened earlier, uh, among,
uh, among white Americans. It's also associated with an
urban rural divide, uh, so people who leave, uh,
rural areas tend to be more likely to get
an education, and so, uh, it has meant, uh,
that urban areas have been moving uh towards the
Democrats, uh, and, uh, non-urban areas have been moving
towards the Republicans. But we'll we're, we are seeing
that when you have a chance to uh kind
of see those trends separated, they do separate uh
with education being more important than urbanicity. So we
saw that in the last election where Trump actually
made some gains in urban areas but did not
make gains in areas that were full of high
education voters. But we simplify it with this college
or not, but it also is a wider spectrum.
So people with graduate degrees. ARE extremely likely to
be on the Democratic side. Uh, PEOPLE with, um,
uh, degrees from a more elite institutions are more
likely to be on the democratic side. Uh, AND
if you separate the people who have 2 year
versus in the middle, some college versus 4 years,
then you see that differentiation from the right to,
uh, the left with the most education. So it's
simplified as college or not, but it's really a
spectrum of education.
And does the diploma divide also include any racial
or ethnic minorities?
So the big trend is that it's concentrated among
white voters and happened first among white voters, but
um one thing that uh you have to keep
in mind is that all among all groups, higher
education voters used to be more Republican. It wasn't
because of higher education, it was because education and
income are related and higher income voters used to
be more Republican. So, uh, among. Hispanic Americans and
Asian Americans, for example, that used to be true.
Uh, AND now we're seeing the decline of that
income divide and the increase in the education divide
among non-white voters as well. Um, IT just hasn't
uh come as fast or as far as it
has among white voters. The big reason because uh
minority voters have continuing attachments to the Democratic Party,
uh, that, uh, move beyond, uh, their opinions on
social issues.
And what is a culture war? WAS, what does
that um term mean and how would you characterize
the current one?
Uh, FIRST, just one thing on the last one,
on the last question about minorities that's relevant here
is that the issue divides that appear, uh, between
college degree holders and non-college degree holders among white
Americans are also there among all other racial categories.
So people with college. Degrees, whether they be white,
black, Hispanic, Asian-American, uh, are more likely to hold
uh liberal positions on social and cultural issues like
race, gender, uh, uh, gay rights, drugs, any, anything
along, uh, that kind of, uh, spectrum. And Um,
that's relevant because the culture war issues have become
an increasing part of our politics. They are more
likely to be mentioned in all kinds of political
communications than they have been, uh, in, uh, the
past. Uh, AND, uh, the reason that it's usually
talked about as a culture war is because it
extends beyond politics. That is, we're arguing about lyrics
and music or uh the role. Of celebrities or,
uh, you know, the latest commercial, everything becomes a
part of this kind of two-sided debate between the
left and the right about uh whether society is
changing too fast, uh, undermining traditional values, or whether
it's kind of embracing the future. And so, uh,
yes, it's tied to these specific social cultural issues,
and that's Why, uh, it can have this predominant
role in our politics, uh, but it's also wider
than that. So almost anything can seem political, uh,
to people, whether you post on Facebook about a
music that you like, uh, or you uh make
a uh pronouncement at the beginning of, uh, your,
uh, talk in a university. All of those things
are gonna be perceived as political much more than
they have been in the past.
And this either side have an advantage over the
other in this culture war?
Uh, IN terms of the changes in society, the
left continually wins. They, uh, went slowly in some
cases and, uh, faster in other cases. Um, BUT
it often appears that they're losing because in any
given, uh, policy issue. At the time, uh, that
it is being raised in politics because it's more
controversial. So just as an example, uh, for gay
rights, we had uh big changes in public opinion
and policy on, on gay rights first and anti-discrimination
laws, then. Uh, IN, uh, um, gay marriage laws,
and now we have a whole set of issues
surrounding transgender, uh, Americans that had been moving leftward
and are now facing a backlash, uh, from the
right. Um, BUT what we've seen historically is that
the right can kind of see ground on individual
issues like on gay marriage. Without losing this overall
perception that things are moving too fast. And so
as an electoral matter, it does not seem to
help the Democrats uh that they uh that that
social values have been moving leftward here because they're
always trying for the next thing, which it might
be unpopular at the time.
And how have these developments manifested on the American
party system?
Well, it's had a huge effect. It has changed
the composition of the Democratic Party in particular and
changed the image of the parties. Um, YOU know,
since for about 50 years, the most popular thing
that people said that they liked about the Democratic
Party, if you just ask an open-ended question, what
do you like about the Democrats? It was that
it's the party of the common man or the
Party of the working class, uh, that and the
most negative thing people said they didn't like about
the Republican Party again for 40 or 50 years
was that it was the party of big business
or the upper class. So these kind of class
cleavage in American politics was a big part of
how people understood the parties, um, but because those
coalitions are now changing, now the image of the
Democratic Party is really tied to. It's white, highly
educated uh constituents and uh the policy issues and
priorities that they are pushing, and the view of
the Republican Party is less about, um, you know,
a, a party of the rich and more about,
uh, a party of those who think that society
is changing too fast, uh, and should, should go
back to the way it was.
So in terms of their issue agenda specifically, how
would you characterize, how would you characterize the changes
that have occurred between the Democrats and the Republicans?
Well, first I do want to say that most
American policymaking at the national and state level is
still about economics and budgets, um, and so part
of what's happening here is we're having campaigns that
are more about social issues and then we have
to go back to governing, uh, and governing is
not necessarily about those things that the campaign was
about, but you can see the parties are trying
their best. To make it about those things. So
even what's happening now in the Trump administration, it's
sort of being pursued as economic policy as about
the budgets of particular agencies or, uh, you know,
stopping particular grants, but it's really all motivated by
this sort of war on wokeness, this idea that
Uh, cultural liberalism has taken over, uh, in, uh,
government and society. One reason why it kind of
is a failed policy agenda is because if you
think about what they're actually trying to, uh, change,
it's much wider than government, right? Uh YES, they're
mad about, say, transgender participation in, uh, the, um.
Uh, IN sports, but they're really mad that there's
an increasing number of people who are identifying as
transgender, and that's just much more difficult to stop
than, say, change a particular policy. On the other
side, the Democratic Party has become increasingly interested in
uh social and cultural issues that manifests in. Uh,
INCLUDING them in all kinds of economic policies. So
you, you had a policy on building factories, for
example, that, uh, now required, uh, particular gender standards,
particular environmental standards, all of those issues got moved
into economic issues, and then also the Priorities changed.
I mean, the two biggest policy changes of the
Biden administration were really the inflation Reduction Act about
uh climate change, uh, and then the student loan
forgiveness, um which was, which are priorities of the
educated compared to uh previous Democratic administrations.
So to illustrate this divide, could you tell us
about the con the contrast between two major political
figures, namely Barack Obama and the message of hope
and change, and Donald Trump and the message of
Make America Great Again or mug.
Yeah, that really encapsulates uh kind of how the
parties are are now viewing themselves and how they're
viewed by outsiders. Um, YOU know, Barack Obama was
obviously himself a uh a manifestation of change. He
was the first black president. He was also a
constitutional law professor uh who talked um like the
the educated. Uh, AND, uh, Donald Trump is a,
uh, has a message of bringing things back to
the way they were, stopping, uh, uh, the, the
extreme uh changes in society that, that he is
seeing and talking in the, you know, more simple,
uh, ways of, um, you know, of, uh, of
consumer marketing and pop, pop culture in ways that,
um, you know, appeal uh to uh less educated
constituents. Um, SO both those slogans, uh, and the
sort of manifestations. Uh, A point to this divide.
Now one thing that we should say is that
this is unlike divides on, uh, say, race and
gender, where the mass parties are divided and so
are the elected officials. Uh, IN terms of education,
what we have is the mass divide um based
on college education, but then the entire political class
basically having college educations, uh, and often graduate educations.
So 95% of members of Congress have college degrees.
70% have graduate degrees. And so you have these
figures, uh, like Donald Trump and JD Vance, who
are saying that they are representative of uh this
uh new constituency, even though they themselves went to
Ivy League institutions, uh, and, uh, are sort of
portraying themselves as kind of traitors to their class,
uh, to represent, uh, uh, people without college degrees.
So these trends that we've been talking about in
regards to social change and how it manifests at
the level of politics, are they, is, is things
that we also see occurring in other countries or
are they mostly or particularly an American phenomenon?
Certainly all across the rich world, we're seeing an
increase in uh the role of social and cultural
issues in politics, uh, and an increase in the
education divide between the left and the right, and
a corresponding decrease in the income divide between the
left. In the right. But we are the strictest
two-party system in the rich world. So what that
means is that um you can have all kinds
of different coalition formations uh in other countries and
you can have uh minor parties who kind of
lead the way. Uh, WHEN it comes to uh
these kinds of differences. So you can have really
populist parties who represent the less educated, who can
leave the kind of high income constituents to the
traditional center-right party, um, but, uh, you know, become
the manifestation of these changes. And then similarly on
the left, you can have your more traditional union
dominated uh party of the center left and have
rising constituents that represent More highly educated in places
like green parties. And so what that means is
that the traditional parties don't change as much, but
they lose share. So most of what's happening in
other parts of the world as a result of
this is that we have, um, you know, we
have a decreasing share for the traditional major parties.
In the US we're stuck with the same two
parties and they've just become different internal coalitions.
So, some social scientists and political scientists have been
pointing to this phenomenon that they say is occurring
more or less across the entire globe of young
women moving to the left progressively. And young men
also progressively moving to the right, so to the
other end of the political spectrum. Is this something
that we also see occurring in the US? And
if so, does it have any relationship at all
with the divide we're talking about here or
not? Uh, IT certainly has a relationship, uh, in,
in two ways. Number one is that the higher
education system has become increasingly dominated by women. Um,
IN fact, it's more geared toward women now than
it was geared toward men before Title IX was
passed in the 1970s. Uh, SO it's been a
big transformation of the higher education sector. Uh, AND,
uh, the gender divide is related to the cultural
issue divide. So women have, uh, more liberal or
left positions on cultural issues, uh, than, uh, men,
and so the more that politics becomes, uh, about
social and cultural issues, the more that you see
uh a gender divide uh across the world. Two
other things I would quickly say about that though,
are that I that I think are sometimes misunderstood,
uh, is that the, um, The first of all,
young people are just more likely to reflect the
politics of the time. So, uh that means that,
you know, you, you don't have a firm partisanship
when you first start voting and so uh that
means that uh you're, you kind of reflect the
trends of the time. So, uh, in, in the
2008 election, young people were assumed to be extremely.
Democratic, uh, this election, they were assumed to be
moving rightward, but part of that is just they're
the people who can move because they don't have
the sort of absolutely stable partisanship. And then the
other, uh, caveat, I guess I would say is,
rather than, uh, saying they're moving left and right,
I think I would just say that men and
women have different positions on social and cultural issues
and so to the extent that those issues become
more important, you see a bigger, bigger divide. Um,
THERE'S not as much evidence, for example, that young
men are actually moving rightward on issues like gay
rights and drugs and things like that, as that,
um, men and women differed on those issues, always
differed on those issues, but now that politics is
about them, uh, there's a bigger gender divide.
And how have the electoral and geographic basis of
support of both the Democrats and the Republicans changed
with the rise of the diploma divide?
Well, they have changed a lot, uh, because, uh,
college educated voters are concentrated geographically, uh, and so
obviously that means that Democrats, uh, you know, increasingly
represent a smaller footprint of the, of the US
and that means they can be disadvantaged uh by
kind of generic lines drawn on a map like
states, uh, or like. Uh, DISTRICTS, uh, that aren't
specifically drawn to try to, uh, equalize uh partisanship.
Uh, IT also, um, we should point out that,
uh, this, uh, education divide is not only an
individual divide, it's also a cultural divide, and that
means that if you live in an area that
is surrounded by college graduates, you are more likely
to be both on the left and moving left.
And if you live in an area that is
whether or not you have a college degree. And
similarly, even if you have a college degree, but
you are surrounded by people who don't have a
college degree, you're also more likely to be on
the right and moving rightwards. So, um, if you're,
say, a someone with a graduate degree who lives
in a college town, then you're kind of at
the extreme end of this, uh, and vice versa.
So that means that you're seeing these increasing geographic
polarization as a result.
And as it manifested or have these changes manifested
in particular ways in terms of the results of
elections.
Uh, YEAH, so certainly, uh, elections more uh more
reflect this divide and decreasingly reflect the divide in
in income that used to uh govern uh election
results. Uh, THEY have mattered for things like fundraising
and uh primary turnout and uh special election turnout
as well, because education is a very strong correlate
of uh political participation, voting, donating. Uh, CALLING your
member of Congress everything that you can think of.
So by moving the most educated section of the
electorate from the Republicans to the Democrats, that means
the Democrats have had access to more money, but
also more activity and more likely participation in traditionally
low turnout elections. So it really has changed kind
of the circumstances of the parties. Um, IT also,
it matters for things like the Electoral College, uh,
because it, it means that, uh, these, uh, states
like Michigan, uh, Pennsylvania, uh, and Wisconsin, which have
lots of white low education voters, um, you know,
are likely to remain, uh, battlegrounds, uh, compared to
to some other places, and some other places that
seemed like they were out of reach, uh, for
Democrats like Georgia, uh, and North Carolina might become,
uh, uh, increasing battlegrounds.
So I would like to ask you now a
little bit about people's attitudes or how the divide
manifests in terms of people's attitudes toward uh educators,
journalists, scientists, and institutions like universities and even experts
in general. So could you start by telling us
about the hostility of Republicans to experts and institutions
like universities and so on.
Uh, YEAH, so as you might imagine, you know,
people who've gone through higher education are gonna be
more positive about uh both educational institutions, uh, and
the role of expertise, uh, in society, um, but
we also, because we have this big divide between
the parties, we've had increasing discussion between. Parties about
these institutions, uh, with Republicans believing they are biased
toward liberals, um, in part because they are, uh,
in, you know, they are, uh, largely and increasingly,
uh, uh, composed of people who are uh liberal
on social and cultural issues and do identify as
Democrats. So, uh, this obviously blew up in the
COVID epidemic in which uh Republicans started to really
be, uh, skeptical of claims of expertise, uh, because
they were associated with impositions of big changes in
people's everyday lives. And uh Republicans perceived that some
of these, um, impositions were guided by political principles
rather than uh by uh expertise. Now, there's no
um divide if you ask people about the principles
of science, or about the whether we should try
to learn more or sort of this sort of
this basics. It's really about the scientists themselves and
the institutions that they're in, like universities and government
that have generated uh this uh skepticism on the
right. But it isn't just hollow language. We're seeing
it now in the administration, where there's really no
respect for people who have been working in particular
issue areas over a long period on uh public
policy or people from the outside, uh who are
grantees or or contractors uh who come from the
sector. Because Republicans believe that uh they have uh
been guided by their political principles, um, and, and
not without cause, there really has been a change
in how these institutions talk about issues like race
and gender, uh, and Republicans have noticed but um
kind of expanded their critique to the institutions as
a whole.
And on the other hand, talking about the Democrats,
what kinds of attitudes do they have toward experts
and institutions like universities?
They're much more favorable, and in the COVID epidemic,
they became much more favorable. We don't know how
much of that will, will be retained, but this
really would be surprising to, you know, 1960s activists
who did not think that, you know, uh, Harvard
University and the New York Times were the heroes
of uh moving uh America in a in a
left. Direction. But now, a lot of Democrats see
these institutions as bulwarks and as, you know, institutions
that should should continue their role in American politics
and society, and it's Republicans who want to burn
them all down, uh, which is, you know, quite,
quite a contrast.
Have there also been changes in terms of the
content produced by conservative media on institutions like universities
and the educational system more generally?
Yeah, and you know, we went through this with
regard to the media earlier, so, you know, again
might surprise people, but trust in the media used
to be higher among Republicans in, in the 1960s
and 1970s because Republicans were higher income and they
were more likely to read a daily newspaper and
Uh, all of that, um, and it really took
this very long, uh, movement, uh, among the conservatives
to say these institutions are liberally biased, uh, and
we should build alternative institutions, uh, and among the
things talked about, for example, uh, one study of
Rush Limbaugh's radio program in the 1990s said that
uh he talked about. Democrats that he didn't like
every day, and he talked about the bias in
the media every single day. So that was the
kind of core message of conservative media. uh, AND
it has now become a core message about universities,
about experts, about uh the higher education voters, and
about cultural uh liberals guiding institutions, even in business,
uh, and in the nonprofit community. Uh, AND, uh,
you know, that's an expansion of this, uh, same,
uh, same kind of rhetoric. And among universities, it's
useful to kind of look at its, it's, uh,
progression. You know, it was always the case that
conservatives were skeptical of people in, you know, ethnic
studies departments and political correctness on campus, but You
saw that it expanded in kind of uh debates
over uh religion and over environmentalism, to not just
be about humanity scholars or social scientists, but now
about natural scientists as well. Uh, AND those institutions,
um, similarly became more invested in, uh, what the
right would see as a political, uh, project over
time. Uh, AND so, uh, that's created our, our
current big divide.
But when it comes to these hostile attitudes toward
uh some institutions like universities, have they have actual
effects on the targeted institutions, are they, for example,
more vulnerable in any way now?
Uh, CERTAINLY, uh, you know, we're seeing right now,
uh, the major threats to university funding, uh, from
the federal government, uh, and, uh, from state governments,
uh, efforts to try to control things uh like
uh faculty hiring, um, curriculum, uh, from, uh, state
governments, and, uh, as, uh, provisions in federal funding.
Uh, SO, uh, all of that is, is a
big change, uh, from, you know, even a few
years ago when higher education was mostly a state
political issue, uh, and it was mostly about, you
know, what can we do to support our states,
universities versus other states, um, and there were. Concerns,
but they were more about access, uh, about, um,
the, about matching the university curriculum with the job
market, uh, things like that, uh, rather than, uh,
this kind of war on wokeness, um, which has
become the most central part of higher education politics
now.
So we've talked about the media, about universities, experts.
How about corporations? Has there been any impact on
corporations, how they are run their values, and how
Republicans and Democrats relate to them and their leadership?
Absolutely. So, um, because people who are have higher
education, uh, have more socially and culturally liberal values
and uh dominate all social institutions, that means that
they have brought those values to those institutions, and
they became pretty open about it in the wake
of George Floyd and uh. Some other, uh, and
the first Trump administration, uh, and that meant that
conservatives really noticed and were alarmed uh about the
the trends in their kind of traditional partner, uh,
in corporate America. So, um, there was a real
change and there is a huge backlash, and that
has uh kind of uh ignited. A big, a
big shift in corporate politics. What we're seeing now
is companies trying to react to the backlash. Uh,
SOME of that is real, some about some of
that is just changing the names, some of it
is just scaling back initiatives that might have been
seen as as temporary uh uh before, but there's
been a big change in corporate policies and in
uh the Republican approach uh to Uh, to companies,
uh, as a, as a result, uh, of this.
Um, WE would just emphasize that, you know, this
isn't, uh, necessarily the, uh, the, the, the Marxist
project, uh, that some conservatives imagine, uh, that, uh,
people came in and took over these institutions. It's
mostly companies responding to their employees, uh, companies responding
to their customers, uh, and. Um, TRYING to follow
social trends, and that's meant, uh, that, you know,
they've been caught up in the same trends, uh,
same social and cultural trends moving leftward, uh, that
the Democratic Party has been, uh, and they're facing
a backlash as a result.
So I would like to ask you now about
how this divide has manifested in terms of policymaking
and with that in mind, let's explore the example
of the COVID-19 pandemic. So how did the divide
manifest during the COVID-19 pandemic?
Well, it was, it was front and center, uh,
because a lot of policymaking uh became the domain
of experts. Americans saw these people that they had
never heard of before guiding uh uh American policy
and a pretty uh drastic changes in everyday life.
Figures like Anthony Fauci, who people had never heard
of, uh, became, you know, they became quickly a
50 point difference in Americans' attitudes toward this guy
uh uh as a result of uh the the
the COVID uh wars, um, and It, it has
had permanent effects. It has meant that Republicans are
more skeptical about the role of experts, about the
role of government officials, about the role of public
health, uh all kinds of uh of of pieces.
Uh, AND we would point out that of course
there are always going to be examples of, of
overreach or policies that went too far or policies
that might have been aligned. Uh, TOWARD, uh, political
values, uh, as opposed to expertise. Um, SO for
example, one salient example that that usually comes up
is that public health officials endorsed protests against uh
George Floyd right after they had opposed protests against
the lockdowns, uh, and told everyone that, you know,
it was dangerous to congregate in large areas, and
conservatives, I think, rightly saw that as motivated by
a set of social and political values. So expertise
is always going to be a combination of greater
knowledge, but also distinct, but not necessarily better values,
uh, and, uh, uh, it is, uh, and of
course, interests, that is the role of uh uh
these people having a bigger impact in society. And
so, um, experts are always going to want kind
of more impact. They are going to be affiliated
with the evidence, uh, but they also have distinct
values, and so. Uh, THAT means, uh, that their
pronouncements are just increasingly politicized today.
So what does it mean to say that everything
is about politics and politics is about everything?
Well, when uh our politics becomes about uh social
and cultural issues and when um people's complaints about
who they're seeing on television, uh or uh what
kind of straws they're encountering in restaurants or, uh,
you know, every single daily, uh, thing can be
associated back uh to some kind of political issue.
Uh, IT really just means that it's hard to
stay out of politics. It also matters for these
institutions that believe that they're kind of not on
one side of the culture of war but are
increasingly placed on one side. So it's very hard
to be an institution that is above the fray,
uh, if you're, say, a technology company or You're
a nonprofit organization, a service provider, um, who wants
to say we're not on either side of the
culture war, um, they really are increasingly on one
side because uh uh every kind of uh pronouncement
or a thing that they do is going to
be perceived as having that uh clear political val.
Um, AND so, you know, it's very hard then
to get out of that. That is, there's a
bunch of self-reinforcing cycles here. Uh, WHERE you can't
sort of say we're gonna step back without that
being perceived as a political move as well.
One last question then. How do you look at
the future of this divide? Do you think that
it is something that could be bridged in any
way? And do you approach it as a problem
that we could and should try to solve, or
are you just, or are you simply um exploring
and a social and political phenomenon here?
Uh, WE'RE admittedly light on solutions, uh, maybe because
they, they aren't readily apparent, but yes, there's a
lot of self-reinforcing processes here. Um, THEY have some
detrimental effects, especially if we talk about how we
see one another, uh, and our ability to communicate
across that divide and actually uh get uh a
policy done. I think sometime this is. Overstated, that
is, like I said, a lot of governing is
still about economic policy and budgets. There's a lot
more bipartisanship than people think because they hear about
the partisan fights but not the things that do
get resolved. Um, AND so in terms of policy
making, there still can be progress, um, but it
tends to get less, less attention. Uh, BUT there
are a lot of, you know, reasons why this
is likely to, to continue, uh, uh, into, uh,
into the future, and all the things that people
want to do to reform the system are also
pieces of the culture war. So, you know, you
could say, well, this means we have to reform
our institutions to do X, Y, and Z, but
that is going to be perceived as uh being
on one side of the social and cultural conflict
that we're having in the United States.
Mhm. Great. So, uh, the book is again polarized
by the Greece, how the diploma divide and the
Culture War Transformed American Politics. I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview. And
Dr. Grossman, just before we go, apart from the
book, where can people find you and your work
on the internet?
Uh, MY website is mattG.org, um, and I'm on
all of the social media platforms as well. If
people wanna follow, uh, current, uh, thoughts, and I
have my own podcast called The Science of Politics
where I interview political science researchers. So, uh, hopefully
people will check that out as well.
Great. I'm also leaving links to that in the
description of the interview, and Dr. Grossman, thank you
so much for again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been a real pleasure
to talk with you.
Thanks, great to talk with you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Francaortolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.